---
layout: post
title: Raft Algorithm, A Beginner's Prespective
subtitle: Lab 2 Part A of MIT 6.824 Distributed Systems(Spring 2021)
cover-img: "../assets/img/raft/lab2A.png"
tags: [Raft, Distributed Systems]
readtime: true
---

## Introduction
The raft algorithm itself has been discussed in great detail in this paper, *[In search of an Understandable Consensus Algorithm](https://raft.github.io/raft.pdf)* . 

Although the functionality and correctness of each part of raft algorithm are quite clear, how these parts are coupling together with each other is a quite difficult part for me when solving this lab.

In this article I will try to explain my understanding of how the system parts are connected together in order to fullfill the leader election for task 2A.

## System Structure
Raft algorithm has mainly two parts, leader election and log replication.

For leader election, a node will start a new eleciton once it doesn't receive any RPC calls(vote request, append entry request or heartbeat) from the leader for a certain amount of time. <del>So, each node should have a election timer to track that and the timer will be reset if a node receive any kinds of RPC call from the leader before the timer stops.

For log replication, in this task, we only need to implement the heartbeat to stop other server nodes from starting new elections. Heartbeat should be sent to every server node repeatedly.<del>So, a timer for heartbeat is natural. When the timer stops, the leader should send heartbeat and reset the timer.

<del>So, now we can arrive at a sketch of the system that there will be two `while` loops. One is for followers regarding leader election and the other is for the leader to send heartbeats. Thanks to `Go`, there is a very nice feature in `Go` that fits perfectly to this scenario and that is [`select`](https://go.dev/tour/concurrency/5). A typical use case of `select` is to control timeout. Let's take a look at the example below for handling tcp timeout. Combining `select` with a loop should enough for this task.

As the professor has mentioned that `time.Timer` and `time.Ticker` are hard to use correctly.

> "You'll need to write code that takes actions periodically or after delays in time. The easiest way to do this is to create a goroutine with a loop that calls time.Sleep(); (see the ticker() goroutine that Make() creates for this purpose). Don't use Go's time.Timer or time.Ticker, which are difficult to use correctly."

So, instead of a loop with `select`, you should write a loop with `time.sleep` and you should check the election timeout in every iteration.

```
// Don't use this code directly
func (rf *Raft) ticker() {
    for rf.killed() == false {

        time.Sleep(electionTimeout)

        // check heartbeats time
        duration := time.Since(rf.getHeartbeatTime())
        if duration > electionTimeout {
            rf.election()
        } else {
            continue
        }
    }
}
```

### Workflow of a server node

If you have no problems of understanding the above part, we can now discuss each part of raft algorithm actually works. 

### Election Part

If a server node starts a election, it first needs to change some states of its own. Then the node should send requests to other server nodes to get their votes. After that, the node should collect replies and take further actions based on those replies.

The key is that sending vote requests to each server node should be asynchronous. Why? Remember that raft works on the idea of quorum. So, a candidate can claim to be the leader once it has votes from a quorum of nodes and ignore the replies of the rest nodes to save some time. So, the sending vote request can run in individual thread and notify the main thread when it's done. 

So, how can the thread working on sending vote request notify the main thread when it's done? Thanks to `Go` again, there is something in `Go` called `Channel`. The channel can establish the communication unidirectionally between the follower can candidate. At the same time, the candidate will stays in a loop to receive the replies from the channel and check whether it can claim to be the leader or not.

### Heartbeat Part

Once a new leader takes office, it will first send a heartbeat to notify all nodes that there is a new leader. After that, it keeps sending heartbeat periodically(as mentioned above, this can be done in a loop running in a `go routine`). This is relatively easy. However, for task 2A, you don't actually need to implement everything mentioned in Figure 2 in the raft paper. Leader's term and leader's id should be enough for now for heartbeat.

## Debugging
### Server Node Stuck in Vote Request

As I mentioned above, the candidate will stay in a loop to check the replies from the followers. But it is possible that the RPC call failed or the follower doesn't vote for this candidate and the candidate cannot get enough votes to be the leader. So, we need to get the candidate be able to jump out the loop and continue. A counter is needed in order to track how many respones of the RPC calls has been received no matter the RPC call successed or not. In this way, we can get the candidate out of the loop when it doesn't get enough votes and start another election or becomes the follower.

### Election Took seconds

There can be a case that the vote request RPC call takes seconds. If the programm wait for that, there will be problems. One thing to learn from the previous `select` version of `ticker()` is that the timer runs independently. That means even the current election isn't over yet, the new election can start. So, this logic has to be implemented in the `time.Sleep()` version.